README.md, before:

[![CI test](https://github.com/genomic-medicine-sweden/RareDisease_RNA_workflow/actions/workflows/ci_test.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/genomic-medicine-sweden/RareDisease_RNA_workflow/actions/workflows/ci_test.yml)
[![Nextflow](https://img.shields.io/badge/nextflow-%E2%89%A521.10.3-brightgreen.svg)](https://www.nextflow.io/)
[![run with docker](https://img.shields.io/badge/run%20with-docker-0db7ed?labelColor=000000&logo=docker)](https://www.docker.com/)
[![run with singularity](https://img.shields.io/badge/run%20with-singularity-1d355c.svg?labelColor=000000)](https://sylabs.io/docs/)

# RareDisease_RNA_workflow

nextflow main.nf --help

To test the pipeline run:

```Console
nextflow main.nf -profile test,<singularity/docker>
```

run a single sample:

```Console
nextflow main.nf -profile singularity --r1 read1.fq.gz --r2 read2.fq.gz --sample sampleID --output output_directory
```

run a single sample with multiple fastq files

```Console
nextflow main.nf -profile singularity --r1 "folder/*R1*.fq.gz" --r2 "folder/*R2*.fq.gz" --sample sampleID --output output_directory
```

NOTE: you need to add quotation marks around the search pattern

run all samples in a samplesheet:

```Console
nextflow main.nf -profile singularity --samplesheet sample.csv --output output_directory
```

The samplesheet is a comma-separated file with the following header:

```Console
id,r1,r2
```

### Local profile

You can setup a custom config to facilitate running the pipeline on your local cluster. Here's how to run the pipeline with the pipeline on the Clinical Genomics Stockholm cluster called hasta with development priority.

```Console
nextflow main.nf -profile singularity,hasta,dev_prio --samplesheet sample.csv --output output_directory
```

## Setup
Modify the config file:

| Parameter | Description |
| --- | ---|
| reference_dir | specify the folder with all your references |
| star_index  |  the star reference index folder |
| fasta | the reference fasta file |
| gtf |  gene annotations in gtf format |
| strandedness |  library strandedness <forward/reverse>, optional |
| rrna_intervals | file with rrna postions in interval_list format. If not provided one will be generated automatically from the gtf gene annotaion file |
| downsample_regions | bed file with regions to be downsampled prior to variant calling. Only 0.1% of the reads will be kept |
| vep_cache | path to vep cache for offline use |
| reference_count_file | File with reference gene counts for aberrant expression analysis (drop) |
| run_drop_ae | Run the aberrant expression module from DROP (Turned off by default) |
| variantcaller | Specify variant caller. Available callers are: bcftools (default) and gatk |


The pipeline will automatically download and cache the singularity/docker images.

You can also install all dependencies, as listed in dependencies

## Dependencies
When using singularity/docker:

	nextflow
	singularity/docker

otherwise:

	nextflow
	bcftools
    BootstrapAnn (https://github.com/J35P312/BootstrapAnn)
	drop
	fastQC
	gatk
	gffcompare
	multiQC
	picard
	samtools
	STAR
	stringtie
	vep

Commit message:

adding option to trim with fastp

README.md, after:

[![CI test](https://github.com/genomic-medicine-sweden/RareDisease_RNA_workflow/actions/workflows/ci_test.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/genomic-medicine-sweden/RareDisease_RNA_workflow/actions/workflows/ci_test.yml)
[![Nextflow](https://img.shields.io/badge/nextflow-%E2%89%A521.10.3-brightgreen.svg)](https://www.nextflow.io/)
[![run with docker](https://img.shields.io/badge/run%20with-docker-0db7ed?labelColor=000000&logo=docker)](https://www.docker.com/)
[![run with singularity](https://img.shields.io/badge/run%20with-singularity-1d355c.svg?labelColor=000000)](https://sylabs.io/docs/)

# RareDisease_RNA_workflow

nextflow main.nf --help

To test the pipeline run:

```Console
nextflow main.nf -profile test,<singularity/docker>
```

run a single sample:

```Console
nextflow main.nf -profile singularity --r1 read1.fq.gz --r2 read2.fq.gz --sample sampleID --output output_directory
```

run a single sample with multiple fastq files

```Console
nextflow main.nf -profile singularity --r1 "folder/*R1*.fq.gz" --r2 "folder/*R2*.fq.gz" --sample sampleID --output output_directory
```

NOTE: you need to add quotation marks around the search pattern

run all samples in a samplesheet:

```Console
nextflow main.nf -profile singularity --samplesheet sample.csv --output output_directory
```

The samplesheet is a comma-separated file with the following header:

```Console
id,r1,r2
```

### Local profile

You can setup a custom config to facilitate running the pipeline on your local cluster. Here's how to run the pipeline with the pipeline on the Clinical Genomics Stockholm cluster called hasta with development priority.

```Console
nextflow main.nf -profile singularity,hasta,dev_prio --samplesheet sample.csv --output output_directory
```

## Setup
Modify the config file:

| Parameter | Description |
| --- | ---|
| reference_dir | specify the folder with all your references |
| star_index  |  the star reference index folder |
| fasta | the reference fasta file |
| gtf |  gene annotations in gtf format |
| strandedness |  library strandedness <forward/reverse>, optional |
| rrna_intervals | file with rrna postions in interval_list format. If not provided one will be generated automatically from the gtf gene annotaion file |
| downsample_regions | bed file with regions to be downsampled prior to variant calling. Only 0.1% of the reads will be kept |
| vep_cache | path to vep cache for offline use |
| reference_count_file | File with reference gene counts for aberrant expression analysis (drop) |
| run_drop_ae | Run the aberrant expression module from DROP (Turned off by default) |
| variantcaller | Specify variant caller. Available callers are: bcftools (default) and gatk |
| trimmer | Specify your read trimmer. Available options are: fastp (default), trimgalore and none |


The pipeline will automatically download and cache the singularity/docker images.

You can also install all dependencies, as listed in dependencies

## Dependencies
When using singularity/docker:

	nextflow
	singularity/docker

otherwise:

	nextflow
	bcftools
    BootstrapAnn (https://github.com/J35P312/BootstrapAnn)
	drop
	fastQC
	gatk
	gffcompare
	multiQC
	picard
	samtools
	STAR
	stringtie
	vep
